Thing says zoom.
Is that, I'm gonna get that wrong.
Oh, I was expecting to be on at five 20. Huh?
Sorry, I was expecting to be on at five 20.
Is my watch wrong? Nevermind.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to talk to you.
Um, I've been a veterinarian for 50 years.
Most of that time I've worked for, um,
primary industry departments in different states
and for the Commonwealth in, uh, Australia
and, uh, in New Zealand for math and,
and D-P-I-M-P-I rather, um,
I've worked on animal welfare standards.
Um, I've been, uh, part of, uh,
national committees on animal welfare,
particularly in Australia.
Um, I've been an expert witness in court cases, uh, dealing
with, uh, animal cruelty.
Um, I've been the independent chair
of Greyhound Racing New Zealand's Animal Health
and Welfare Committee for three years.
Uh, the role of the Animal Health
and Welfare Committee of GRNZ is to advance the care
and wellbeing of racing greyhounds in New Zealand.
I don't represent GRNZ.
I'm an independent, um, consultant
and, uh, my role on the committee is
as an the independent chair.
I'm very proud of the achievements of, uh, the Animal Health
and Welfare Committee in providing advice to GRNZ over
that three year period.
And even before, uh, I,
before the time that I was chair,
when I became the chair, I met with the board.
I told them that I was not prepared to do the job
unless, uh, animal health, uh, sorry, animal welfare was,
uh, central to all the decisions that, uh, that the board
of GRNZ made.
And they gave me a commitment that they, that would be
how it would work, and I have seen no evidence that they've,
they've, uh, departed from that agreement.
Over the three years, uh,
I've seen GRNZ prioritize animal welfare at all times.
There's been three reviews into the industry.
As you know, the first two were commissioned
by the industry, and the third one,
the Robertson Review in 20 20 21, uh,
was commissioned by the government.
Each of those highlighted issues with the industry
and the, in each case, the industry responded to the issues
that were, that were identified.
The decision to ban the industry seems to have been based,
uh, on the 2021 review findings
with no recognition of the progress made by industry.
Since the Robertson Review was published, uh,
there's been no contact between the minister
and GRNZ over that period.
Um, my sub, uh, my written submission,
you'll find I list 23 initiatives
that have been implemented since 2021
to improve grey and welfare.
For example, race fatalities have been reduced by 85%,
and unnecessary euthanasia have been reduced to zero,
and that zero has been for several years.
Um, the previous government placed the industry on notice,
as we all know, it had
to improve greyhound welfare or be closed down.
There's no question that the industry did
improve Greyhound welfare.
In many ways, serious injury rates in New Zealand are
comparable or lower than Australian Gray greyhound racing,
and they're lower than in the, in both
of the horse codes, either of the horse codes.
Uh, race fatality numbers are roughly half
of those for thoroughbred racing.
Even since the announcement
of the closure in December, 2024, Greyhound racing, uh,
greyhound welfare, sorry, has been improving.
Injury severity is declining,
and in the, the two most recent quarters, um,
the, um, moderate
to severe injury rates have been the lowest ever recorded.
The industry has been prevented from improving further, um,
with the possible closure hanging over its head
for three or four years.
It could not invest millions in a new planned safer track at
Ashburton, for example,
to replace the Addington track in Christchurch.
It was not possible for the, the board
to say we're going to invest.
I think it was $9 million in, in, um, creating a new track,
which would have been safer.
Um, when the industry was under threat of closure,
uh, or in new straight tracks,
we built a new straight track in Wonga, we opened in 2023,
and the injury rates, there are about half that
of the curve tracks.
You've heard a lot about straight tracks already.
I know, assuming so I'm, I'm against the closure,
but assuming that closure will happen,
fair compensation must be paid
over a thousand people will be deprived
of their livelihood directly.
Plus, there's a, a lot of other indu, uh,
businesses which depend on, um, income from
the Greyhound racing industry.
Often the families that have been, that will be affected,
have been in the business for generations.
They're often in rural areas
where their specialized skills are not readily
translated into new employment.
Compensation is not just a moral and ethical imperative.
It's required by the government's own legislation.
The Regi Regulatory Standards Act, section nine Part C,
I've heard that, that the industry shouldn't be compensated
because the industry's been on notice for,
for three or four years.
Yes, it has been on notice,
but it was under threat of closure if it did not address the
issues raised in the reviews,
and all the participants in the industry could see progress
that had been made in regard to an to greyhound welfare.
So the decision to close down was still of surprise to most
of the industry, and it was a surprise to me.
I, I thought the industry had had done enough to be able
to maintain its, uh, its, uh, existence.
I, I'm just gonna say, Alan,
before you carry on that, we've, we are just about at time.
So if you want, and I know Miles Anderson has a question,
so, um, if you want to wrap up now,
we can take a question. Otherwise
I will wrap up. I understood
I had 10 minutes. Yeah.
So f so fair compensation must be paid if the
industry is to close.
The legislation should make this clear. Thank you.
Okay, thank you. Um, miles, we've got a question.
Yeah, thanks, chair.
Um, Alan, we've had a number
of submitters today talk about injury stats, um, saying
that all of them are hidden, um,
because they happen in training
or off the track,
so they're not included in the general statistics.
Could you, um, enlighten us, please?
Uh, yeah, I think there's some truth in that,
but I mean, there's, there's also an enormous amount
of misinformation about, uh, statistics.
Uh, we heard a minute ago that, um, what was the, the, the,
uh, the figure was it 650 dogs were euthanized?
Um, that includes dogs that are, that were pets kept by, uh,
member kept by trainers
after they'd been re retired from the industry.
And they might be 14 year olds who are euthanized, uh, as
any pet dog might be euthanized at the end of its life.
There's statistics
and the statistics now, I agree that there are injuries
that can happen off the track
that might not come up in the official statistics.
Thank you. Excellent.
Well, thank you very much for your time.
Oh, have you got a quick question? Sorry, Mark's got a
Question. Uh, thank you, chair. Uh,
thank you for your submission.
Um, right early on the piece, there was, um, an organization
that made an allegation about, um,
dogs being deliberately removed from public view,
being warehoused to avoid scrutiny, um, et cetera.
There was no evidence provided.
Have you got any thoughts on that?
I didn't hear that. Um, submission, um,
and I'm, I don't really know what, what,
what it's about. Yeah,
It was a, it's a written in, in their written submission.
Oh, okay. Um, Greyhound dogs are currently being crated,
substandard conditions deliberately removed
and being warehoused, uh, to avoid scrutiny. Would
You? Okay. Well, look,
every, every, um,
training premises is visited once a year, at least by, uh,
the ROB inspectors.
And they're looking, they're, they're tracing every dog
and ensuring that it's there.
Yeah. Um, I can't see that that's gonna work.
So that's not possible in your,
Well, it would be difficult,
and I don't believe it's happening.
I can't say categorically. Thank you.
Thank you very much for your time.
Thank you.
We now have Glenda Cues in person for 10 minutes.
Welcome, Glenda.
Can I, before we start? Absolutely.
Good afternoon. As, uh,
chair has just announced, I am Glen De Hughes.
Um, I have previously served as an independent chair
of the New Zealand Racing Board Chair
of the Racing Integrity Board,
interim Chief Executive Officer of Greyhounds New Zealand
during the Robertson Review,
and as a consultant to the SPCA,
I currently chair Pet Refuge
and am a director of Kids Can and Barnards.
In, uh, 2017, during my terms
as the racing board chair, I initiated the Hanson Review
as an independent, uh, organization from the Racing Board.
So I guess it's a racing industry, initiated it,
but not greyhounds.
Um, and, and basically when that one came, and that was
after the 2013 review, which was initiated by Greyhounds,
which was the W-H-A-W-H-K review,
I was then asked when I finished my term
at the Racing Board, if, um, by the chair
of Greyhound racing to serve as the interim CEO
with a clear mandate to lift Greyhound WA welfare.
That mandate shaped every decision I made.
And what I do want to say is, A, I'm not a punter
and PB, um, I don't own greyhounds,
and I've never been involved in the industry apart from
understanding the importance of welfare, as you can tell
by my current share pet refuge,
based on observed outcomes arising from government
and regulatory decisions,
I have serious concerns about the racing industry closure
of Greyhound Racing Industry Amendment Bill
and its current film.
The bill lacks sufficient ev evidentiary support
and for fails to ensure due process
its passage will have significant negative consequences
for livelihoods mental health,
and will result in the extinction of a dog breed
that has raced in New Zealand since the 18 hundreds.
The bill is not a response to evidence.
It is a reaction to spin,
and it does not achieve its stated purpose.
You do not improve welfare
by dismantling the regulatory system that enforces it.
Removing this framework creates real risk,
including the emergence of unregulated
or black market racing.
This concern was raised with members
during the hearings last week.
This bill removes greyhound protections
and lumps them with the general pet population, a sector
or readily reported to be widely in crisis.
This environment does not improve welfare.
It shifts risks and obscures accountability.
This matters because tens of thousands
of companion animals are already being euthanized each year,
and pounds and short and shelters often due to overcrowding
and constrained resources.
No one knows this more than the SPCA, which no longer
publicly shares its euthanasia, uh, numbers.
Its head of advocacy actively lobbies government ministers
to close greyhound racing.
While the crisis in the companion animal sector,
which struggles to reduce harm in euthanasia rates,
is surely the country's more urgent problem.
Policy development should not be outsourced
to advocacy organizations,
however well intentioned they are.
The regulatory impact statement acknowledges
that the industry should have been consulted and was not.
It explicitly identifies material risks to livelihoods
and mental health, yet the bill fails to address them.
I say this with respect for the Institution of Parliament.
This risks becoming an example
of lawmaking divorced from consequences.
The Rabbe Racing industry's new flagship welfare initiative
is a purpose-built horse crematorium,
which boasts the double burn chamber.
Having personally overseen,
world leading greyhound welfare reforms, transparency
and lifetime traceability.
I find it jarring that these achievements are ignored while
a horse crematorium is presented as life after racing.
There is also a glaring double standard.
Domestic greyhound racing is to be shut down.
While Australian greyhound racing continues to be imported
for gambling purposes,
perversely profits from overseas greyhound racing will be
used to fund the domestic force racing.
I added this in because members have asked why more track
tracks were not built earlier.
Under my leadership, the Wang Nu Track was closed,
the original Wang Nu Track was closed.
We then undertook extensive consultation with both local
and international experts across multiple disciplines
to ensure any straight track design genuinely
reduced injury risk.
There was no point in just building something without the
evidence and the research.
This included curators, source specialists, veterinarians,
engineers, lure drivers, trainers,
and Professor David eager,
a leading academic authority at a University of Sydney.
Um, injury prevention and causation.
The straight track project was then delayed, not by lack
of intent, but by land acquisition challenges, COVID,
lockdowns and significant flooding Once land was secured
and all expert advice reviewed construction
of the Wgnu straight track commenced following its
completion planning for a second straight track in the south
island, which has already been discussed as
as part of this, I want to, I, I'm sort of,
I'm normally bought into fix systems.
That's, that's why people employ me.
I've been employed in many organizations for doing that.
Um, that's what you see with the pet refuge one
and the kids can one
or two examples of systems that I've actually worked on.
So I would like to propose that a fair
and workable middle ground might be worth considering.
I found when I was dealing with the people in Greyhounds,
they were extremely helpful
and extremely responsive to all of the changes.
And some of those ones that I brought in were pretty tough,
and I feel quite guilty about the mortgages that some
of them have taken out to make sure that they were living
and keeping up to the standard.
Um, that, uh, that we were demanding
targeted evidence-based reform, including limiting racing
to one turn and straight tracks.
There is also a lot less injuries on the bend of, of, uh,
straight tracks as well, as long as the boxes are far away.
I never thought I'd be able to talk about stuff like this.
I have to tell you, um, as well as
where you place the starting box
and all of those things to make a huge difference to injury.
As a former athlete, I was able to understand that and,
and it actually made real sense.
So I just think including limiting racing to one turn
and straight tracks would continue reducing the injuries,
protect the livelihoods,
and prevent the extinction of the braid breed.
People don't seem to realize that in about five
or six years, there will be no greyhounds to wander around
as a pet, and I won't be able to have one in my old age.
It would also preserve the welfare gains already achieved
and the industry substantial contribution to our economy
if the ban proceeds.
Regardless, fair compensation must be
provided to those who invested in good faith.
Believe, just to ease my conscious a little bit,
but for the, for the bigger reason,
believing there would be proper and impartial process
and the continued importation
of overseas greyhound racing must end if that happens.
Fantastic. Thank, thank you very much.
We have a question from Cameron Luxton,
Uh, thank you chair. Um,
thank you Glenda, for your submission.
Um, there we've had the committee's heard, uh,
some submitters say there is no, uh,
way in which racing
or exploiting animals that will ever be acceptable to them.
Do you feel that even if a compromise such
as the one you were suggesting, if, if that was to happen,
that that would ever alleviate the concerns of the people
who want seemingly want to end greyhound racing?
No. As, as a former of police officer, I'm extremely aware
that there are people, and I admire them for them,
and I accept their right to be there that are
tied into a specific, sometimes ideology or a specific view.
So I don't think, I don't think whatever the the committee
does with those people, that, um, you will change them and,
and I accept that that's their right.
Um, uh, do you have a sub on that, Cameron? No. Okay.
Um, Tangi.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, thank you Glenda.
Uh, given y your background, uh, in this industry, one
of the things that, uh,
Greyhound Racing New Zealand have suggested is if this bill
does proceed, that actually the role
of the Mac is not best aligned to deal with transition,
but Greyhound racing New Zealand itself would be,
do you have any thoughts or views on the suitability
of either, given the fact
that you've been involved in a number of different, uh, sort
of avenues and worn many hats? Yeah,
Yeah. No, I,
I certainly do.
Um, I have to admit that when I got into greyhounds
and found out the whole complications of,
and the importance of how those dogs are looked
after, the fact that they are very different, um, the,
the fact that the, the business is different,
it definitely needs to be run by people
that actually understand how it works and how the dogs work.
And I would definitely say
that the current staff at Greyhound Racing New Zealand,
although I must admit a conflict of interest here,
'cause I employed some of them, um,
would be the right people to be actually doing that.
And as for the, um, re-homing program, which had started
before I got there, the people that are running
that Rehoming program are just excellent
and it would be absolutely crazy
for it to go to anybody else.
Yep. Fantastic.
Thank you very much and thank you for, um, taking the time
to sit here all day and listen to everything.
Yeah.
Okay. So last submitters of the day,
Ray Hound Racing New Zealand.
We have you for 20 minutes, so I'm sure there'll be plenty
of questions, so please give
us time for questions at the end.
Thank you very much.
We'll try and be short. Thank you Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today.
My name is Edward Ronnell.
I'm the Chief executive of Greyhound Racing in New Zealand.
With me today, I have Sean Hannon, our chairman, Dr.
DA Gavin Gable, our animal welfare manager
and Chief veterinarian and Sue Walls, our head
of operations, and it as background.
I've been fortunate to merge my interest in racing
with my career for the majority of my professional life.
I've previously been the chief executive
of harness racing in New Zealand for 21 years, chair
of the T-A-B-N-Z dates Committee for three
and general manager broadcast in operations
for TABN NZ for two years.
Since September 22.
It has been my privilege
to be chief executive at Greyhound Racing in New Zealand.
I have fond memories of going into my first Greyhound
meeting as a kid in 1980 at the old KI E two park,
taking GR NZ submission as read,
I'll not waste your Time countering the misinformation,
spurious allegations,
and selective interpretation of statistics that many
of the proponents of the band have outlined to you today.
JR Z's transparent reporting of statistics is subject
to independent verification
and monitored by the minister's statutory regulator,
the Race Integrity Board.
These statistics are independently verified and irrefutable.
I've had a common question throughout the hearings
is why didn't we do more?
The evolution, evolution
of a progressive animal welfare program
and the changes we have made over the last five years are
significant revolutionary and frankly enormous.
The Indi industry employs and consult experts
and leads the way in reforms I can say with authority.
Given my extensive experience in the racing industry
that greyhound racing leads the way in New Zealand in terms
of animal welfare, I'm tremendously proud
of our unrelenting commitment to do the right thing
by our canine athletes.
This commitment has been demonstrated to you in the voices
and testimonies presented throughout the hearing.
Greyhound racing is the only racing code in New Zealand
with full traceability of our animals.
The only code where the animals are guaranteed a live post
racing, and one
that has a rehabilitation two rehoming scheme
to ensure injured animals are medically cared for
and subsequently adopted into suitable homes.
JNZ does not celebrate purpose-built Crematoriums
as a wealth in wealth initiative.
Our race day euthanasia rate is half that
of the Thoroughbred Code in New Zealand.
These hearings have been the first opportunity
for our people to be heard by lawmakers,
and I thank the members sincerely of this committee
for the empathy that's been
extended over the two days of hearing.
It's certainly been appreciated. Thank you.
The fact that the minister responsible
for this legislation can arrive at such a decision
devastating people, dogs,
and economic activity without, without any engagement
with the industry, is an indictment on New
Zealand's political processes.
It has made me and many question
our faith in our political systems.
You good people have the ability to restore that faith.
Over the last two days, members have heard the harrowing
and confronting submissions from our people.
I don't, I do not need to repeat these.
I could never convey them as passionately
or as eloquently as these genuine,
hardworking new Zealanders
that are impacted by this decision.
The hurt, the utter devastation, the sense
of unfairness and anger.
The mental anguish was clear for all to see
family units ripped apart.
Lifetime investments, obliterated generational
commitments and passions.
Wide doubt. You have to ask why
to win a few more votes, secure more funding
for the protected equine codes.
I don't know. Only one man can answer that,
and he refuses to talk to me.
The legislation before you reflects the shoddy way.
The minister's office and the,
and the officials have approached this.
Legislate approached this decision.
The ministerial advisory committee was appointed in December
24, and one
of their key responsibilities stated in their terms
of reference was to create a transitional plan
for the closure of the industry.
14 months later, there is no plan
and it is still work in progress.
You and your parliamentary colleagues have been asked
to pass a bill now and manage the consequences later.
It's not good enough. Such plan, while it will be complex
with a myriad of issues to be considered, has to be done,
the bill is due to take effect in a matter of months.
Where is the plan? This is Max's responsibility, not GRNZ.
This ongoing certainty as to what is going
to happen in the very near future is causing great distress
amongst our participants and negatively affecting the health
and wellbeing of our people.
It is a ban without a plan.
The process is absent due diligence,
and I urge the committee
to hold the minister to account on this.
He is asleep at the wheel.
If closure is to happen, which we are opposed to,
it must be done in a fair and principled manner.
At our first meeting with the ministerial advisory committee
chair, Heather Simpson made it very clear
that there would be no compensation
for industry participants
and that we had 18 months to scale down activity.
This was out with this without even having passed the bill.
It is hard to escape the conclusion that the timing
of the proposed closure was set more on the basis
to occur just
before the coming election, rather than
what was logical in the best interest of the people
and the dogs as outlined in our written submission,
our participants have incurred costs
and invested heavily in many cases, their life savings
and good faith.
They have invested in breeding
and racing greyhounds at considerable costs only
to have careers curtailed by hasty and premature closure.
They have invested in greyhound equipment
and upgraded facilities
to meet our comprehensive welfare standards.
Those costs are now sunk and cannot be realized.
It is therefore heartening to hear members
of this committee use the C word compensation.
Thank you for this. Our preliminary estimates are
that at least $40 million commitment would be required.
We would welcome the opportunity,
however, to provide 'em
of more defined analysis once the government confirms its
appetite for fairness and justice.
In looking at this, there is ample precedent in New Zealand
law for such compensation.
There are the key matters in our submission
that require your consideration chiefly the absorption
and wind up of legitimate incorporated societies.
And the illogical double standard with the import
of overseas greyhound racing.
The Green Party has already stated this is unacceptable,
and I thank them and acknowledge this.
Finally, Sue Bruce Robertson made the statement in his 2021
review that if closure was to be seriously contemplated,
then a full scale inquiry will be required
to assess all the consequences.
Why then has the industry not been extended this right?
We would welcome such an inquiry surely
before you wipe 159 million from the economy
cost 1,054 hardworking people their jobs
and destroy families and communities.
You must be sure you are basing this on the right
information, not prejudicial personal political agendas.
One wonders would Mr. Peters have been emboldened
to make this decision if the SBCA hadn't offered him
assurances, they would not be calling
for a ban on horse racing.
Personal convictions by the minister
and his advisor, John Johansson, are not submission,
are not sufficient to write laws.
I implore this committee dedicated people
who entered politics for the right reason
to ignore party lines
and make a statement, this style of lawmaking is not okay.
Please reject this bill
and have the industry reviewed objectively and fairly.
Thank you for your time and we welcomed your questions.
Thank you very much. Thanks indeed.
Um, so I have questions here from Miles, Cameron, Steve
and Tongy in that order. Miles, you're up first.
Thanks, chair. Look, um, thanks
for your submission, Edward.
That was, um, uh, very fulsome.
Could you, um, expand on what your, um,
or what you believe is supposed
to happen under the current proposal, um, to
the Racing Club's assets?
Well, the way the legislation is drafted,
the assets would be, the clubs would be wound up
by GRNZ if funds absorbed by G-N-G-R-N-Z
and GRNZ would go through a similar process and,
and the funds would transfer
to the transition authority appointed under the act.
Uh, and, and has the ministerial advisory Committee
engaged around this?
We had some preliminary discussions, Sean
and myself, I think back in May.
But there has, we have had no more detail on that than
what is provided in the draft legislation.
We have had one couple of subsequent meetings in December,
January around the preparation of the transition plan
and some of it, and trying to identify the work
that would be required in the closure.
And that's one aspect of it would need to be considered.
Thank you.
Um, we actually, we'll go to Tangi next. Thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, thank you Edward.
Um, I asked g Glenda Hughes about the, the placement
of either Greyhound Race New Zealand
or the Mac to, in the event that this bill does, uh,
proceed deal with the transitional sort of phases.
Now you've alluded to this specifically in your written
submission in terms of greyhound racing,
New Zealand being best placed
to lead out that particular phase.
Just giving you an opportunity
to perhaps elaborate a little bit more, um, in that space.
Yeah, so we provided to the MAT committee an outline
I can last April of how potentially
REHOMING could be conducted, um, following the closure.
And what we were advocating that, uh, with that, um,
is that essentially most
of Greyhound racing structures could be maintained to manage
that process along with, uh, our adoption a you know,
the adoption agencies.
Um, last year we, um, with the support of the agencies,
we had 697 dogs adopted.
So that, you know, it was a significant achievement.
It's not broken, it's working well.
And we believe that those existing structures
should be continued to drive that adoption process.
It wouldn't be Greyhound racing New Zealand in its current
form, but it would be, uh, it would need, you know,
a a lesser version, but employing
and utilizing the, the resources
and assets of the people that are there.
Okay, thanks Cameron.
Oh, thank you. Uh, uh, Tony touched on part
of my question, but it's, do you think that whatever, uh,
Edward, do you think whatever plan, uh,
there has been a sufficient openness about a potential plan
and based on your experience now with, uh,
the ministerial advisory, uh, group
or a committee, do you think that they will be able
to rehome all the dogs?
No, it will take, you know, the REHOMING process.
You know, when we looked at the papers on which the
government made this decision, they were,
the assumptions were
that the whole population wouldn't be rehomed by 31 July 26.
I think the Mac committee, when they started to review it,
we quickly identified that that was very unlikely
and almost impossible.
And I think their report indicates that it will take two
to two and a half years post closure to achieve that.
Uh, that in terms of, are they the best, um,
people to drive that?
Well, they were appointed in December 24.
As of today, we don't have a transition plan.
They only advertise for a, um,
establishment lead in December of 25.
So for 12 months, I don't believe there has
been sufficient progress.
Thank you. And do your, oh, sorry.
I'll leave it there. Chair. Thank you.
Oh, thank you. Okay. Steve, do you have a new question?
Yeah, thank you. I do Madam Chair and thank you Edel.
Good to see you all here
and, um, appreciate you've been here for all
of the hearings, um, in terms
of understanding your core position.
But, um, we, you usefully make key recommendations on
how things should be done in your submission.
If there is to be a closure, you suggest that, uh,
it be extended the closure date from the 31st of July 26th
to July 29.
Um, I wonder if it wasn't the full three years,
but was one year
or two years longer whether that would still be beneficial.
And my second part to that question is, is there a risk
of its three years that, that then the
breeding of new greyhounds would begin?
Again?
I think if there was to be a ban,
but it was to be extended, there would need
to be a ban on breeding so
that we don't have more dogs coming in.
However, the three years was to ensure that dogs
that have been bred can have a full, full career.
Um, a dog generally starts racing at 18 months
and on average they race through to up to four.
So the extension would, you know,
and we, we would've had pups born in January 25
that probably will not race
before the band comes into effect.
That would bred in good faith.
The key advantage in having an extension
is you actually still provide the, you know, the benefits
of trainers continuing to roast their dogs.
There will be income coming in for the trainers
and they can then look
after their, their dogs that are in their kennels awaiting
to go onto the great mate scheme.
So it provides the income for that to happen.
If that doesn't happen and you just have no racing
and you have dogs sitting in kennels held
by TR trainers waiting to go into great mates,
they will need to be reimbursed for that on a per day basis.
'cause they've got no income coming in from racing
to feed the dogs, pay staff
and ensure the welfare of those animals.
I just stop on that madam chair.
Okay, I'll, I'll just go first if that's okay.
Oh, you go. No, you go Steve,
It, it's a quick stop on the finances of it
because there has been a suggestion
that if there is gonna continue to be, uh,
income coming from the Australian gambling, that
that should go to Greyhound racing New Zealand
to pay for that sort of thing.
Wouldn't be that the, the other way to do it.
Yeah, well, uh, effectively that's the income from
that under the current funding arrangements,
under the tri code funding agreement, the TAB makes a profit
and makes a a, an allocation of three codes
and they, they determine the split within, you know,
Greyhound racing gets a share of that.
And market share is just around the 13 to 14%.
I think our funding's just about 12 and a half.
So the funding from that enables our ability to pay
for our welfare initiatives, but also maintain
and pay stakes and the like.
But, but just to add to that, it's the,
the income alone from Australian racing is insufficient
to cover the cost to close the industry.
So to rehome two
and a half thousand old greyhounds over the next three
years, um, we estimate somewhere between 40 and $50 million.
Um, if we were going to fairly
and reasonably compensate participants, uh,
then potentially there's, there's another 40 to $50 million,
uh, you know, that someone's gotta pay for it.
Uh, and there's nothing in the bill
that indicates who's gonna pay for it
or how it's gonna be paid for.
Uh, the income we get from the imported racing, uh,
from Australia is, is roughly eight to 10 million a year.
So there's a massive deficit
that no one's quite comprehending quite yet.
Uh, and even if we did continue racing, uh,
our market share would decline as the volume
of dogs declines, the volume of racing will decline,
our income will decline,
but we've still got dogs to feed, dogs to be home, uh,
and participant compensation to consider.
Okay. I have a start going back to the previous line
of questioning a a little bit about the, um,
you talked about extending it
and that would make it better for all the trainers
and there was some people that raised the issue today about
how the investment back into the track would be, would,
would wane as time went on when we knew it was gonna
be a finite industry.
So how would you ensure that that didn't then increase?
How would you give reassurance to those people
that were concerned about it?
How would you give them reassurance
that it wasn't actually gonna have a further detrimental
impact on the safety of the dogs
because of less investment because of the fine
Industry? Yeah. Well, again, it depends
on
where the income comes from.
So currently we spend eight
to 10 million a year on welfare initiatives.
Um, track safety initiatives development.
Uh, if, if our income is maintained at the current level,
that investment can continue.
Uh, but there will come a tipping point
where if the income drops off,
the money's gotta come from somewhere else.
So someone has to pay for it.
Uh, and, and that's, that's the choice.
You know, if the money's not there,
you can't spend the money on either feeding the dogs
or looking after the tracks
or compensating the participants.
All of which need to be done in a, in a,
in a safe racing ecosystem.
Thank you very much. Miles, you've still got your hand up?
Yeah, I've got another question
Actually.
Okay. Make it quick.
Yeah. Look, we've been quoted, um, three different figures
for the number of dogs that need to be rehomed.
One figure is 1600, another figure is two
and a half thousand, and the final figure is 3,300.
Which figure, um, should we rely on?
Yeah, so our population miles were at the time
of the decision was around 2,900.
So when that happened, I think reading effectively stopped
and our REHOMING has continued.
The, the projections we've given the ministerial advisory
committee, um, was last April that there would be 1500 dogs
at 31 July 26.
It would still would still need rehoming.
Um, adoption rates are slightly lower in the current year,
so it's, you know, it will be between 1500
and 1600 as our projections,
but that's dependent on
what happens in the next seven months with adoptions.
Oh, thank you very much. That clarifies it nicely for me.
Okay. With last one.
My he sorry. Thank you.
Um, just on that, um, you talk about the, um,
rehoming slowed down, all the appetite was slowed down.
Is that a very real risk?
And, you know, I'm sitting there thinking about a whole lot
of things that could happen if all this comes to pass.
So we've got, um, potentially breeders that have invested
and borrowed a lot of money that will not be profitable
or viable, could potentially go into liquidation
and go, I can't feed my dogs.
Who's problem is it? Um, and where's the money come from?
We've got, um, a diminishing appetite for people
to rehome dogs.
Um, and then there's also that counter, you know,
if they're rehoming, greyhounds, um,
they're not rehoming other dogs from other rescue
organizations that I guess all those things,
I'm, I'm just trying to make the point.
All those things have gotta be taken into consideration.
Does worry me a lot about
what could potentially go wrong if we don't get it right.
I think you're a hundred percent right if more greyhounds
are rehomed, that's less other, other breeds of dogs
that have been adopted, which will have an impact in terms
of the euthanasia stats that the, that are
associations of other breeds. Mm. It's natural.
Yeah. Thank you very much.
And thank your individual submission too.
That was very impressive. Thank
You. Thank you.
Those questions?
Yeah,
Madam Chair, what are we doing? Yes, Steve,
Are we going into Private?
I'm in the hands of the clerk. Sorry.
Um, maybe we move into private. We're just
Waiting to move into private. Yeah.
We've still got a room full of people.
I understand. Yeah, yeah, Yeah.
So we'll Google these good, uh, good folk
who have been sitting here all day.
Thank you very much. Yeah. Um, so thank you very much. Yeah.
If you could move to the private.